Feature Gates (#30)
strimzi/proposals: 022-feature-gates.md

* The state of the Kubernetes resources

The following examples show how are these mechanisms used to give a better idea:

* The `strimzi.io/use-connector-resources` annotation in the `KafkaConnect` custom resource defines whether the Connector Operator should be enabled or not for given Kafka Connect resource.
* The `useServiceDnsDomain` in the listener configuration of the `Kafka` custom resource defines what kind of address should be used for given listener.
  Whether fully qualified DNS name or not.
* When the operator during Kafka upgrade sees that the old pods are still using the TLS sidecars, it will automatically loosen the TLS configuration to make sure the upgrade can be completed.

## Motivation

In many cases, the mechanisms described above work fine and are well suited.
But there are also limitations:

* Changes to the custom resources APIs have permanent character.
  We can remove fields from the CRDs only when changing the API versions.
  So adding fields to the Kafka CR is not a good option to gradually roll out changes or change a default behavior over multiple releases.
* Sometimes, you also want to just change the behavior of the operator in general.

>   But you want to avoid having endless list of `enableFeatureX`, `disableFeatureY`, or `useZ` fields in the custom resources.

Author: Sorry, I'm not sure I follow this comment. I mean in theory, you can change the default of the field in the API in the same way you change the you change the default of the feature gate. Or do you mean that that would be against best API practices?

>   But you want to avoid having endless list of `enableFeatureX`, `disableFeatureY`, or `useZ` fields in the custom resources.

Reviewer: Changing a default value is often not backwards compatible, because it's often difficult to reason that it couldn't possibly break something for users. Because of this it means that not only do early adopters end up with lots of `enableFeatureX`, `disableFeatureY` it means that anyone who wants to use those features (even when they become _recommended_ things which all Strimzi users should use) ends up with those fields.

But I can see this is rather a convoluted argument, so I'm fine with not adding it to the proposal.

>   But you want to avoid having endless list of `enableFeatureX`, `disableFeatureY`, or `useZ` fields in the custom resources.

Author: Got it. I tried to add it to the text.

In such case, the feature gates might be used to modified the behavior of the operator and enable / disable certain features.
In use case like this, the default state of the feature gate should be based on what we expect to be more common or set to keep the original behavior to maintain backwards compatibility.
Feature gates used for this use cases might be never removed.

An example of this use case might be feature gates to disable automatic creation of Pod Disruption Budgets or Network Policies.

### Implementation

Initially the feature gates support should be implemented in Cluster Operator.
But the same logic can be also applied to User and Topic Operators.
The feature gates will be configured in an environment variable `STRIMZI_FEATURE_GATES`.
Since the feature gates might be enabled or disabled by default, the configuration needs to consist of coma-separated key-value pairs.
The key will be the name of the feature gate and the value will be a boolean defining the state -  either enabling it (`true`) or disabling it (`false`).

> For example `PodDisruptionBudgets=false,NetworkPolicies=false,ControlPlaneListener=true`.

Reviewer: Alternative: `STRIMZI_FEATURE_GATES=-PodDisruptionBudgets,-NetworkPolicies,+ControlPlaneListener`. I don't have a strong opinion though.

I assume it's an error for a name to appear more than once?

# Feature Gates

This proposal suggests to add support for Feature Gates in the Strimzi operators.
Feature Gates should give us additional options how to control and mature different behaviors in the operators.

## Current situation

Currently, any features or behaviors of the operator are controlled by one of these two mechanisms:

* The Strimzi custom resources (as a form of an API)

> * The state of the Kubernetes resources

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The state of the Kubernetes resources
* Environmental variables in the operator deployment
```
I think it's worth calling this out explicitly as if differs slightly from the other kube resources

The following examples show how are these mechanisms used to give a better idea:

* The `strimzi.io/use-connector-resources` annotation in the `KafkaConnect` custom resource defines whether the Connector Operator should be enabled or not for given Kafka Connect resource.
* The `useServiceDnsDomain` in the listener configuration of the `Kafka` custom resource defines what kind of address should be used for given listener.
  Whether fully qualified DNS name or not.
* When the operator during Kafka upgrade sees that the old pods are still using the TLS sidecars, it will automatically loosen the TLS configuration to make sure the upgrade can be completed.

## Motivation

In many cases, the mechanisms described above work fine and are well suited.
But there are also limitations:

> * Changes to the custom resources APIs have permanent character.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Changes to the custom resources APIs have upgrade and forwards compatibility concerns.
```
Just reworded as I understand what it was getting at, but also you then refute its permanence in the next line, I think being more specific here is better, but your point is still well delivered.

  We can remove fields from the CRDs only when changing the API versions.
  So adding fields to the Kafka CR is not a good option to gradually roll out changes or change a default behavior over multiple releases.
* Sometimes, you also want to just change the behavior of the operator in general.
  But you want to avoid having endless list of `enableFeatureX`, `disableFeatureY`, or `useZ` fields in the custom resources.
* The use of the state of the existing Kubernetes resources works well for one-of operations.
  That fits well for upgrades or for triggering actions such as restarting a pod.
  But not for features which change the operator behavior during the whole run of the operator.

This shows the there might be space for other ways how to enable or disable features.

## Proposal

Strimzi operators should support _feature gates_ to gate selected functionality and switch it on or off.

> Each feature gate will have a default state (enabled or disabled by default) and users will be able to manually enable or disable them.

Reviewer 2: Not to over-engineer here, but is there ever a case where we may want enums instead of booleans?
I think Booleans can cover almost all use cases, but I suppose there might be interesting scenarios where whole different options could be considered?

Author: I would probably prefer to avoid this. I think that it would make it more complicated not just to use them in the code but also make the user experience worse and more complicated.

Reviewer 2: Makes sense

The feature gates will apply for the whole operator and alter its behavior.

The feature gates should go through 3 different maturity stages:
* Alpha (typically disabled by default)
* Beta (typically enabled by default)
* General Availability / GA (typically enabled by default or always enabled)

Alpha stage indicates that the feature might be unstable (i.e. it might change in the future) or buggy.
Beta stage indicates a that the feature is already well tested and most probably should not change.
GA means that the feature is stable and should not change anymore.
GA features might optionally also change to _always enabled features_.
In this case the feature gate will be removed and it will not be possible to disable the feature anymore.
The alpha and beta features might be removed in case they are deemed as not useful or not the solution.

Typically, the gated features should be introduced using a Strimzi Proposal

> The proposal should also suggest the plan for how the feature will move through the different maturity stages.

Reviewer 2: I suppose that wherever the feature flags are listed, we will comment/annotate the lines with their maturity level?
I fear if there is a split and the maturity is tracked via issues the knowledge may be harder to find/update

Author: I added a new sentence to specifically mention that it should be listed int he documentation.

An example of this use case might be feature gates to disable automatic creation of Pod Disruption Budgets or Network Policies.

### Implementation

Initially the feature gates support should be implemented in Cluster Operator.
But the same logic can be also applied to User and Topic Operators.
The feature gates will be configured in an environment variable `STRIMZI_FEATURE_GATES`.
They should be configures as a comma separated list of feature gate names prefix with `+` for enabling or `-` for disabling the feature gate.
For example `-PodDisruptionBudgets,-NetworkPolicies,+ControlPlaneListener`.
If any feature gate appears in the list more then once, the operator will throw an exception and exit.
The operator will throw an exception and exit also in case a non-existing or removed feature gate appears in the list.
Feature gates not in the list will have the default value.

The feature gates will be parsed and stored in the `ClusterOperatorConfig` class / object.
The `ClusterOperatorConfig` object is already used in different places in the operator and makes the feature gates easily accessible without any major changes to the code structure.

## Compatibility

> There are no compatibility issues.

Reviewer 2: I know this is just a proposal, but I wonder how we plan to have feature gated CRD API changes, i.e. if we add a new experimental/alpha field, say, `spec.alpha` , how do we ensure this doesnt make it into the GA release?
Are we going to maintain multiple CRDs?
Or simply just allow devs to overwrite the CRD locally? (I think the latter is ill advised, but the former sounds like more generated file checkins!)

Author: I do not think we can do it as that would be:
* Breaking the compatibility
* Forcing the people to often convert the resources which we want to avoid

The main idea of the feature gates for me is to avoid the CRD changes where not needed to control things. But if you really need to change the API, I'm not sure you need the feature gate. E.g. when you need to add new field to the CRD to configure something, do you really need the feature gate to control it? Or is either having it or not having it in the CR enough? At the end, the maturity level can be carried also in the API reference documentation.

Reviewer 2: Ah that makes a lot of sense, apologies I was still viewing it from the old way, but indeed, if there is new config sections, I suppose we can include the new fields and just ignore doing anything with them if certain features not enabled.
